Add the migration guide [ECR-3839] (#1242)
exonum/exonum-java-binding: exonum-java-binding/doc/Migration_guide_0.9.md

# Migrating Java Services to 0.9

> The flagship feature of Exonum Java 0.9 release is support for dynamic services&nbsp;—

Reviewer: does `&nbsp;` really needed?

Author: If we want to keep that emdash on the line) Not very much.

services that can be added to the blockchain network after it has been started;
and multiple instances of the same service.

This guide provides instructions on updating existing services to be compatible with the new
and updated features.

> ## Dynamic Services 101

Reviewer: maybe I'm out of the context but what is 101?

Author: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/101_(topic)

Author: It is a number usually assigned to introductory courses, but that is US-specific. Could change to 'Overview'

Dynamic Java services are packaged in an _artifact_: a JAR archive with some metadata. An Exonum

> artifact has a runtime-specific _name_ and globally-unique _identifier_. Java services must

Author: The artifact id story is confusing because there are several conflicting terms:
* '_Exonum_ artifact id' (runtime_id + name, e.g., runtime_id=0, name=com.exonum.example:timestamping:1.0.2) vs '_Maven_ artifact id' (timestamping).
* 'Exonum artifact name' (e.g. com.exonum.example:timestamping:1.0.2 or rust-timestamping:3.2.1 or anything, actually) vs 'Maven artifact id' (which could be considered as project _name_).

I am not sure we shall explain 'identifier' here at all if it is not used during deploy/instantiation directly. (@vitvakatu is it?)

use name in the format 'groupId:artifactId:version', where each component of the name corresponds
to a Maven project coordinate, for example: 'com.exonum.example:timestamping:1.0.2' is a valid
artifact name.
The format of the metadata has not changed since 0.6.0.

Artifacts are _deployed_ to the Exonum blockchain network; and then used to instantiate
_service instances_. A single artifact can be used to create many instances. Each instance
has a _name_ (ex `Service#getName`) and a numeric _identifier_ (ex `Service#getId`).
An instance name is specified by the network administrators during service instantiation;
an id is assigned by the framework automatically and can be [queried][service-id-lc-operation]
using the light client.

> [service-id-lc-operation]: todo

Author: This todo will remain, I think, up until the release

[supervisor]: todo

### Update the Schema

#### Isolate Collections via Namespaces

Use a unique for each service instance namespace for service collections (e.g., a service name,
or an id).

#### Update ProofMaps

The default [`ProofMap`][proof-map] implementation has been changed to hash user keys to produce an internal key.
That allows _any_ type to be used as a key; but adds an extra hashing operation for every insert
operation and changes how proofs need to be verified.

In some cases (rarer than is usually considered), it might be needed to **not** hash the keys
(use them as _internal_ keys). Such `ProofMap` variant is still supported, see if your
service implementation fits the [*requirements*][proof-map-non-hashing] to keep using it.
If it doesn't — please migrate your schema to use the new default one.

[proof-map]: https://exonum.com/doc/api/java-binding/0.9.0-rc1/com/exonum/binding/core/storage/indices/ProofMapIndexProxy.html
[proof-map-non-hashing]: https://exonum.com/doc/api/java-binding/0.9.0-rc1/com/exonum/binding/core/storage/indices/ProofMapIndexProxy.html#key-hashing

#### Disable Proofs

> Proofs are temporarily disabled. Creating proofs is _not_ supported in this release.

Reviewer: Will you get any error if you try to get the prof from, for example, ListProofIndex? If yes mb it's good to mention it?

Author: Doesn't 'disabled and not supported' imply 'won't work, don't use'? I think we will `@Deprecate` the proof creating methods for this release (to keep tests for now, because we will need them later, but disallow usages); maybe — replace implementations with an exception. Shall we specify the exact behaviour here?

Reviewer: >  Shall we specify the exact behavior here?

it's not required, just curious

  to add a service instance of a previously deployed artifact with the given name and id.
  If needed, initialization parameters may be supplied using an overloaded method.

The parameters: artifactsDirectory, artifactId, artifactFilename may be passed to the test code
from the build configuration properties (where they are already specified) using system properties.

Finally, if the integration tests using the testkit are located in the same module as the service,
they need to be bound to `verify` Maven phase so that a service artifact built during `package` 
phase is available.

### Use Example

See a complete diff of changes applied to the cryptocurrency-demo service
to support the new Exonum Java version. Your service implementation
is likely to require similar changes:

```
git clone git@github.com:exonum/exonum-java-binding.git
cd exonum-java-binding/exonum-java-binding/cryptocurrency-demo
git diff ejb/v0.8.0 ejb/v0.9.0-rc1 .
```

## Update Node Configuration

1. Remove "services.toml" configuration file. Both Java services and the built-in ones
shall be deployed and instantiated using exonum-launcher or an alternative tool — see 
the reference below.

> 2. Specify the artifacts directory when starting a node `artifacts-path`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Specify the artifacts directory when starting a node using `artifacts-path` argument.
```

# Migrating Java Services to 0.9

The flagship feature of Exonum Java 0.9 release is support for dynamic services&nbsp;—
services that can be added to the blockchain network after it has been started;
and multiple instances of the same service.

This guide provides instructions on updating existing services to be compatible with the new
and updated features.

## Dynamic Services Overview

Dynamic Java services are packaged in an _artifact_: a JAR archive with some metadata. An Exonum

> artifact has a runtime-specific _name_. Java services must use name in the format 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
artifact has a runtime-specific _name_. Java services must use the name in the format 
```

'groupId:artifactId:version', where each component of the name corresponds
to a Maven project coordinate, for example: 'com.exonum.example:timestamping:1.0.2' is a valid

> artifact name. Rust service names are usually in format '<crate-name>:<version>'.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
artifact name. Rust service names are usually in the format '<crate-name>:<version>'.
```

The format of the metadata has not changed since 0.6.0.

> Artifacts are _deployed_ to the Exonum blockchain network; and then used to instantiate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Artifacts are _deployed_ to the Exonum blockchain network and then used to instantiate
```

_service instances_. A single artifact can be used to create many instances. Each instance
has a _name_ (ex `Service#getName`) and a numeric _identifier_ (ex `Service#getId`).

> An instance name is specified by the network administrators during service instantiation;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An instance name is specified by the network administrators during the service instantiation;
```

> an id is assigned by the framework automatically and can be [queried][service-id-lc-operation]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
an ID is assigned by the framework automatically and can be [queried][service-id-lc-operation]
```

using the light client.

[service-id-lc-operation]: todo

## Update the Service

The [`Service`][service] implementation must be updated to support multiple instances;
new initialization and reconfiguration procedures.

> 1. Remove the hardcoded service id and name. Add a constructor parameter 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Remove the hardcoded service ID and name. Add a constructor parameter 
```

> `ServiceInstanceSpec instanceSpec` which provides instance name

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`ServiceInstanceSpec instanceSpec` which provides the instance name
```

> and id.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and ID.
```

    - If your service extends
    [`com.exonum.binding.core.service.AbstractService`][abstract-service] —

>     pass the `instanceSpec` to the superclass constructor and use provided `AbstractService#getId`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    pass the `instanceSpec` to the superclass constructor and use the provided `AbstractService#getId`,
```

    `getName`, and `getInstanceSpec` methods

>     - If it implements `Service` directly — save the needed information to fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - If it implements `Service` directly — save the needed information to the fields.
```

Author: Just to clarify: _some_ fields (we don't say to which fields or how many of them or of which type — that's up to the implementor), but _the_ fields defined in this class (what is referred to by 'it' preposition). Is it 'the'?

```java
public final class FooService extends AbstractService {
  @Inject
  public FooService(ServiceInstanceSpec instanceSpec) {
    super(instanceSpec);
  }
}
```

2. If the service requires initialization — migrate to the new 
[initialization mechanism][service-initialize]. 

> 3. If the service needs reconfiguration support: implement [`Configurable`][configurable] interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. If the service needs reconfiguration support: implement the [`Configurable`][configurable] interface.
```

Reconfiguration shall be performed through the new [supervisor][supervisor] service which
replaces the configuration service.

[service]: https://exonum.com/doc/api/java-binding/0.9.0-rc1/com/exonum/binding/core/service/Service.html
[service-initialize]: https://exonum.com/doc/api/java-binding/0.9.0-rc1/com/exonum/binding/core/service/Service.html#initialize-com.exonum.binding.core.storage.database.Fork-com.exonum.binding.core.service.Configuration-
[configurable]: https://exonum.com/doc/api/java-binding/0.9.0-rc1/com/exonum/binding/core/service/Configurable.html
<!-- todo: Check the anchor when the docs land -->
[supervisor]: https://exonum.com/doc/version/0.13-rc1/get-started/java-binding/#deploy-and-start-service

### Update the Schema

#### Isolate Collections via Namespaces

> Use a unique for each service instance namespace for service collections (e.g., a service name,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use a unique instance namespace for each service in service collections (e.g., a service name,
```

Author: We use 'service instance' as a term to highlight, when needed, the difference between _service artifacts_ and _service instances_. unique — among all service instances (even of all types).

With this patch it might also appear that there are services in collections.

Author: Maybe, "Use a namespace for/in the service collections that is unique among all service instances (e.g., ....)"

> or an id).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or an ID).
```

#### Update ProofMaps

The default [`ProofMap`][proof-map] implementation has been changed to hash user keys to produce an internal key.

> That allows _any_ type to be used as a key; but adds an extra hashing operation for every insert

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That allows _any_ type to be used as a key. But the new implementation adds an extra hashing operation for every insert
```

operation and changes how proofs need to be verified.

> In some cases (rarer than is usually considered), it might be needed to **not** hash the keys

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some rare cases it is advisable **not** to hash the keys
```

Author: I am not sure about 'advisable' because the only positive effect of that is slightly higher performance; but to use it correctly a user must ensure that the referenced restrictions are met (they are here, till the link is fixed: https://github.com/exonum/exonum-java-binding/blob/4295cf898af1c64d40c50480b3135ed53c5f1339/exonum-java-binding/core/src/main/java/com/exonum/binding/core/storage/indices/ProofMapIndexProxy.java#L58-L69)

If they are met — it is better to use non-hashing variant.

> (use them as _internal_ keys). Such `ProofMap` variant is still supported, see if your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and use them as _internal_ keys. Such `ProofMap` variant is still supported. See if your
```

service implementation fits the [*requirements*][proof-map-non-hashing] to keep using it.

> If it doesn't — please migrate your schema to use the new default one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If it does not — please migrate your schema to use the new default one.
```

[proof-map]: https://exonum.com/doc/api/java-binding/0.9.0-rc1/com/exonum/binding/core/storage/indices/ProofMapIndexProxy.html
[proof-map-non-hashing]: https://exonum.com/doc/api/java-binding/0.9.0-rc1/com/exonum/binding/core/storage/indices/ProofMapIndexProxy.html#key-hashing

#### Disable Proofs

Proofs are temporarily disabled. Creating proofs is _not_ supported in this release.

> They will be re-enabled in one of the next releases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
They will be re-enabled in one of the following releases.
```

### Update the Transactions

> 1. Update the [`TransactionConverter#toTransaction`][to-transaction]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Update [`TransactionConverter#toTransaction`][to-transaction]
```

to its new signature.

> 2. Use `int` ids in transactions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Use `int` IDs in transactions.
```

> 3. When needed to access the newly namespaced schema in `Transaction#execute`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. To access the schema in `Transaction#execute`,
```

use [`TransactionContext.getServiceName`][tx-context-get-name]
or `TransactionContext.getServiceId`:

```java
  @Override
  public void execute(TransactionContext context) throws TransactionExecutionException {
    MySchema schema = new MySchema(context.getFork(), context.getServiceName());
    // ...
  }
```

4. Remove `Transaction#info` implementation: this method is no longer provided.

> The core returns complete transaction messages in response to transaction request,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The core returns complete transaction message in response to a transaction request,
```

> which can be decoded by the client using appropriate protobuf declarations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which can be decoded by the client using appropriate Protobuf declarations.
```

[to-transaction]: https://exonum.com/doc/api/java-binding/0.9.0-rc1/com/exonum/binding/core/service/TransactionConverter.html
[tx-context-get-name]: https://exonum.com/doc/api/java-binding/0.9.0-rc1/com/exonum/binding/core/transaction/TransactionContext.html#getServiceName--

### Update the Integration Tests

> The integration tests using Exonum Testkit to create a test network with a service-under-test need

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The integration tests that use Exonum Testkit to create a test network with a service-under-test need
```

> to be updated to pass the parameters required for artifact deployment and service instantiation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to be updated. In the new tests you need to pass the parameters required for artifact deployment and service instantiation.
```

Use the following Testkit builder methods:
  - `withArtifactsDirectory(artifactsDirectory: Path)` to specify the directory in which the service

>   artifacts are located (usually, the `${project.build.directory}` = `target` directory)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  artifacts are located. Usually the `target` directory is `${project.build.directory}`.
```

Author: `target` is always `${project.build.directory}` (unless someone is doing crazy things)

  - `withDeployedArtifact(artifactId: ServiceArtifactId, artifactFilename: String)` 
  to specify an artifact to deploy in the test network
  - `withService(artifactId: ServiceArtifactId, serviceName: String, serviceId: int)` 

>   to add a service instance of a previously deployed artifact with the given name and id.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  to add a service instance of the previously deployed artifact with the given name and ID.
```

>   If needed, initialization parameters may be supplied using an overloaded method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  If needed, supply initialization parameters using an overloaded method.
```

> The parameters: artifactsDirectory, artifactId, artifactFilename may be passed to the test code

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Pass the `artifactsDirectory`, `artifactId`, `artifactFilename` parameters to the test code. Use the system properties
```

Author: "Pass ... to the test code" does not make much sense. You _somehow_ need to and will  pass them; but you could use the system properties for that.

Author: So it's more like "We recommend/Consider doing that using this particular mechanism *[because it is reliable enough and won't cause duplication of constants]* — but you could also do that differently"

Reviewer 3: How about the following variant then?
> To pass the `artifactsDirectory`, `artifactId`, `artifactFilename` parameters to the test code, use the system properties from the build configuration properties, where the latter are already specified.

> from the build configuration properties (where they are already specified) using system properties.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
from the build configuration properties, where they are already specified.
```

> Finally, if the integration tests using the testkit are located in the same module as the service,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, if the integration tests using the Testkit are located in the same module as the service,
```

> they need to be bound to `verify` Maven phase so that a service artifact built during `package` 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
bound them to the `verify` Maven phase. Then the service artifact built during the `package` 
```

phase is available.

See the [updated section on testing](https://exonum.com/doc/version/0.13-rc1/get-started/java-binding/#testing)
for extra examples.

### Use Example

See a complete diff of changes applied to the cryptocurrency-demo service
to support the new Exonum Java version. Your service implementation
is likely to require similar changes:

```
git clone git@github.com:exonum/exonum-java-binding.git
cd exonum-java-binding/exonum-java-binding/cryptocurrency-demo
git diff ejb/v0.8.0 ejb/v0.9.0-rc1 .
```

## Update Node Configuration

> 1. Remove "services.toml" configuration file. Both Java services and the built-in ones

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Remove "services.toml" configuration file. Deploy and instantiate both Java services and the built-in services
```

> shall be deployed and instantiated using exonum-launcher or an alternative tool — see 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
using exonum-launcher or an alternative tool — see 
```

the reference below.

> 2. Specify the artifacts directory when starting a node using `artifacts-path` argument.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Specify the artifacts directory when starting a node using the `artifacts-path` argument.
```

> 3. Copy the artifacts to-be-deployed in that directory on each node in the network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Copy the artifacts to be deployed in that directory on each node in the network.
```

Author: Maybe also 'into that directory'?

See the updated node and application configuration [documentation][node-config] on the site

> for detailed instructions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
for the detailed instructions.
```

[node-config]: https://exonum.com/doc/version/0.13-rc1/get-started/java-binding/#node-configuration

## Update the Clients

Update the light client to a compatible version to interact with the newer Exonum version.

> In Exonum 0.13/Exonum Java 0.9 a transaction message format has been changed. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Exonum 0.13/Exonum Java 0.9 the transaction message format has been changed. 
```

`TransactionMessage.Builder` supports this newest format.

> Also, the clients have to be configured with the instance name and id to be able

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Also, configure the clients with the instance name and ID to be able
```
